[ Music ]
>> Lisa Garr: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr
host of Gaiam Inspirations.
Would you like to know
what God looks like?
How about heaven, would you like
to know what heaven looks like?
Well, these are not
the questions
that Harvard train neurosurgeon
Dr. Eben Alexander was asking
himself when a rare form
of meningitis attacked his
brain causing him to go
into a coma for seven days.
And what he found
there, he describes
in his book as Proof of Heaven.
Welcome to the show,
thank for being here.
>> Eben Alexander:
Well, thank you Lisa,
it's so good to be here.
>> Lisa Garr: It gives me
chills to even say that opening,
what you have been through,
and what you're here to share
with us is extraordinary.
So, let's start up talking a
little bit about your experience
as a neurosurgeon,
as a man of science
and all the research
that you did.
How does that come into play
with your experience now,
being a man of science?
>> Eben Alexander: Well, I
think the important thing
to understand, I had grown
up in a scientific family.
My father very much
is a scientist.
He was neurosurgeon, head
of a training program.
So, he trained other
neurosurgeons.
He was also very spiritual.
So, I had both those things
in my upbringing and went
to a Methodist Church and I'm--
much my life wanted to believe
in God, and heaven,
and power of prayer,
but through a long career
in neurosurgery, you know,
15 years at Harvard Medical
School, dealing with thousands
of patients, many
of them had been
in coma for various reasons.
I found it harder and harder
to explain how consciousness
could survive death
of the body and brain.
And so, in fact when I went
into coma in 2008, I was driven
into coma very rapidly within
a few hours by a severe case
of bacterial meningitis that by
all right should have killed me.
>> LG: And what is
the percentage
of people that it does kill?
>> EA: Well, bacterial
meningitis is a 100 percent
fail, if not treated.
Even when treated rapidly
with the right antibiotics,
most series it's still 30
to 40-- 50 percent fail.
And in fact in my particular
case, given that I went
into coma within about
3 and a half or 4 hours
of unsettled symptoms.
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: That in itself when I got
to the emergency
room I was found
to have bacterial meningitis,
going into coma that quickly
with bacterial meningitis
takes you to about a 10 percent
or less survival
for that illness.
By the end of the week,
when I was not responding
to antibiotics, that was down
to about a 2 or 3 percent chance
of survival with no
chance of recovery.
>> LG: What happens to the
brain when you have that type
of a bacterial infection?
>> EA: Well, it actually
is the most perfect model
of human death, because
that kind
of bacterial infection
attacks the neocortex,
it attacks the entire
outer surface of the brain.
And that's the part that
absolutely crucial for all
of our human consciousness.
All the details of our
conscious awareness
since before we were born,
everything we see, hear are kind
of a logical, rational
thinking language, understanding
of our surroundings and
of our body position
and space every bit
of that requires
that complex calculator
of the neocortex.
And that's why, severe bacterial
meningitis was such a gift,
because it basically
attacked all of that
and should have taken me
down to a level according
to modern neuroscience where
I would have only the most
rudimentary form
of consciousness
which I describe in my book.
I think that that
earthworm's eye view was
that rudimentary course, kind
of unresponsive consciousness
that one could have when most
of their neocortex has been
killed off by bacteria.
>> LG: The most simplest
form of consciousness,
is that what you mean
very uncomplicated?
>> EA: Well, a very kind of
simplistic rudimentary form
of awareness that would be
completely non interactive,
non aware, I mean in
that original state,
in that earthworm eye view--
>> LG: Earthworm eye view,
what do you mean by that?
>> EA: That was-- that's
how I describe in my book
that first realm that I was in--
>> LG: OK.
>> EA: Which is basically
a very course underground
where like being in dirty
jello and totally unresponsive.
People had often asked me
was that hell or purgatory?
I would think hell would be at
least a little bit interactive
and this was not at all
interactive even though
that meningitis that very simple
course consciousness involve no
recollection whatsoever of my
life before, nothing at all
of language, no knowledge of
earth, humans, absolutely zero
about Eben Alexander, certainly
not any of my religions
or any other kind of background.
All that was completely wiped
out which enabled my NDE
to have some unusual
features that are a typical,
and yet I look at them,
it's making it the exception
that proves the rule,
that validates millions
of other similar stories.
>> LG: Yes.
Did you ever have
a form and opinion
of near death experiences before
when you were practicing
as a neurosurgeon?
Did you ever have
an opinion of those?
>> EA: I was-- before my coma,
I was very much a card toadying
conventional neuroscientist.
I believed completely in
what they called reductive
materialist view of
the world that is
if you can explain everything
in terms of electrons,
corks [phonetic], protons,
neutrons, the physics,
chemistry, biology that you
can then explain everything
about all of the existence.
The only problem with that
conventional science is I came
to see it after my coma is
that that conventional science
has not the most primitive
explanation whatsoever for how
the physical brain might give
rise to consciousness.
And that's a tremendous
red flag.
>> LG: Interesting.
As you had said once
in your book
that the body can actually
function without or is it
without the use of the heart--
the brain, is that
what you've said?
>> EA: Well, that the--
>> LG: The death of the body
and the brain are not the end
of consciousness you said.
>> EA: Right.
Exactly, in fact with my coma
journey showed me very clearly.
And this was that gift of
severe bacterial meningitis
that should've killed me
or at least absolutely
limited my conscious experience
to the most rudimentary
as opposed
to the most incredible ultra
real vibrant journey life
changing that I could ever
imagine which is what happened.
And there was no place in
my brain for that to unfold.
Before my coma, being that
conventional neuroscientist,
I thought with the brain
creates consciousness.
So, when the brain and
body die, that's the end
and that is absolutely false.
I've come to realize.
I never paid any attention to
the near death literature before
because my physical is mind set,
it's set its all birth to death
and the brain creates
consciousness--
>> LG: Right.
>> EA: I had absolutely no way
to understand how those
phenomenon could occur.
So, I was unwilling to look at
the data and come to understand
that there are tens of
thousands of reports out there
and the similarity is
far away the differences.
>> LG: Absolutely.
So, I have a question about
your book in the prologue.
Why did you make the
choice to tell us
about your incredible
sky diving experiences?
You were an avid sky diver.
You loved flying
since you're a child.
What is the correlation there?
>> EA: Well, I think
to me and looking back
on it especially it became
clear that I was always trying
to get up above this world.
It's like I felt more at
home being up and above.
And, you know, as
I tell my book I--
when I was 14 years old I
soloed in sailplanes and to me--
>> LG: 14.
>> EA: -- at 14 and I was
just always wanting to be up,
whether if it's climbing trees
when I was a young kid or,
you know, I was pole vaulting
in high school, the sailplanes
at age 14, and the sky
diving all through college.
It was always about trying
to get into a higher realm
and I think in a sense that
serves as kind of a metaphor
for what I ended up doing--
>> LG: Absolutely.
>> EA: -- in my big
journey, deep in coma.
>> LG: So, you're into the
wormhole experience of--
I just called it a wormhole
you said-- you called it a--
>> EA: Earthworm's eye view.
>> LG: Earthworm's eye view.
So, then you enter to this
incredible blissful state.
Tell us about that.
>> EA: Well, the--
that initial realm,
as I said I had no
language and a word,
no memory of my life before,
that was that earthworm
eye view.
And that amnesia from my life
before was present throughout
this journey.
It's very important because it
led this on atypical features
because many souls who go
into near death experience
and comeback to talk about it
go in and have some knowing
of an identity and of their
relationship with other souls.
And it's important
that in my journey
and of course originally
I explained all this
because of the severe
bacterial meningitis wiping
out my neocortex.
I now know their
far deeper reasons
for why it all unfolded
the way it did.
But that was the explanation
it was necessary at that time.
And then from that
realm I was rescued
by the slowly spinning
pure white light
that came towards me.
I remembered it looked
liked it had a surface kind
of a ground glass but it
was a very pure clear light
where these fine white and gold
filaments coming off of it.
>> LG: Kind of ever
decent opalescent?
>> EA: It was very
much an opalescent--
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: -- orb of light.
Very clear, very pure and it had
the most perfect musical melody.
And it came towards me
very slowly spinning.
And as it did I was just
captivated by this light
and then it opened up
like a rip in the fabric
of that gross earthworm
eye view realm and lit
up into this brilliant valley
into what I call the Gateway
Valley, the gateway realm.
And the vivid ultra real nature
of that valley is something
that is so far beyond words,
I was moving up through it
because I was a spec of
awareness, on a butterfly away.
Now, of course, you know,
the skeptics hear butterfly
and they hear the rest of this
beautiful earth-like valley
and they get a little mislead.
They start thinking, well,
this is just trappings
of your brain before in kind
of earth-like stop
that got layered on.
And I think there is some
of that for some people,
for me that's a lot less
convincing because I had
such a complete destruction
of my neocortex that allowed
for a lot of this to unfold.
>> LG: And you saw that through
the-- this-- the brain scans?
>> EA: Oh yeah.
Through the brain scans and
neurologic exams, I mean,
it was very clear that the
meningitis had severely attacked
my neocortex.
And that's what was
causing the coma.
I mean, I looked-- I also
knew all the drugs I was on,
I knew the drug doses all
through the week correlated
with the neurologic exams,
correlated with the scans.
So, it was clear to me, I
went into coma, you know,
in my home-- in my bed at home.
I had seizures and then was
comatose intermittently seizing
and then maybe out of deep coma
but certainly not conscious
at all for the-- at first hour
to into the emergency room.
And then my exams from
that point on showed
that my neurologic
function declined.
They did have me on sedatives
during some of that time.
>> LG: But none of those
had psychotropic effects?
>> EA: Well, they could
have if I'd had much
of a neocortex left to function.
But in fact, by that time,
my neocortex was not working.
And that was documented in the
neurologic exams that showed
that happening and then
on scans on several days,
CT-scans showing that I had
swelling through both sides,
hemispheres all eight lobes
and was even losing what's
called the gray-white junction
at the depth-- the
deepest layers
of a neocortex was
starting to melt away due
to the effect of the meningitis.
>> LG: It is amazing you're
even sitting here talking
like you are without any damage.
>> EA: I think that's one of
the things that was so shocking.
And of course I didn't realize
at first how shocking that was.
>> LG: Because you [inaudible]--
>> EA: Because I had no
idea how sick I'd been.
And when I fist came back,
from coma, it's also important
to point out that my brain
had been badly damaged.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: My language--
>> LG: Yeah.
>> EA: -- was just beginning
to come back when I woke
up on the 7th day and when they
took out the breathing tube.
And so, language was coming back
but I remembered
nothing of my life.
And two of my sisters spent
nights in my ICU room with me.
They would kind of relive
some of our family memories
of vacations, when we're
kids and things like that.
They tell me stories that
initially to me were fascinating
but I wasn't part of them.
But then slowly that
started triggering
and bringing things back.
So, over a few weeks, a
lot of my kind of family
and childhood memories
came back.
>> LG: Oh, that was
nice of them.
I went though the same
experience where I--
I had a near death experience
and went to that beautiful place
that I called Oneness but
out of it I lost my memory
for good three months.
>> EA: Well, a lot of my
memories of life before
like knowledge of consciousness
of brain mind of physics,
chemistry, all of that took up
to six weeks or so to come back.
So, that was very
important because I went--
when I first came back
within a few days,
I knew every bit
of where I'd been.
That story--
>> LG: That was--
>> EA: -- was rich
as could be and
yet I remembered nothing
of life before coma.
And so, while, and of course
when I would tell my doctors
some of what I remembered,
they would pat me
on the back and say,
"Oh, you were very sick.
Your brain was so damaged
by this meningitis.
There is no way you could have
had any experience like that.
So, you can forget about it."
You know, the dying brain
does all kinds of tricks.
>> LG: OK.
>> EA: I didn't know any
better so I believed them.
You know, most people believe
their doctors so I'd say, "OK,
a dying brain could
do any trick."
But I gleaned enough from
that that to realize there had
to be some kind of lesson
in there about consciousness
because I knew what
I remembered.
And I remembered a
very vivid odyssey,
if you'd ask me how long
I've been in that coma.
I would have said at
least months maybe years.
It means a long very
extensive odyssey.
And so, I knew there had to be
some kind of lesson in there
about consciousness because my
doctors were telling me nothing
could have happened,
your brain was too sick.
>> LG: Can you go back to this
spec on the butterfly wing
that you were and that feeling
not even a feeling it was an
experience that you
had of that brightness.
Did you experience a-- it was a
little girl that came in and--
>> EA: Well.
>> LG: -- her face
appeared, right?
>> EA: Yeah, on this
butterfly wing when I went
up into this beautiful valley
ultra real and the colors
of the butterfly, and gain
this is not a butterfly
like some entomologist on
earth could give you genus
and species.
It's simply the best
word I have to convey
about what was my mode
of transportation.
>> LG: OK.
>> EA: We move up into that
valley and there were millions
of other butterflies
and they were flying
in this tremendous lovely
river of life and color
and we would sweep down
into that lush greenery.
And as we flew by, buds
on trees and blossoms
on flowers would open up.
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: And these rich textures
and colors beyond the rainbow,
waterfalls and the
sparkling pools--
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: -- below us, souls
are dancing a lots of joy
and mirth children
playing, dogs are jumping,
incredible-- just idyllic scene.
>> LG: Is this what
you would describe
as your best definition
of heaven?
>> EA: Well, it's
only a part of it
because in fact there
were two main realms
that I visited beyond
that earthworm eye view.
This first one, this
gateway realm,
that beautiful idyllic valley
with the souls dancing,
souls between lives and that
on that butterfly
wing, a beautiful girl.
Absolutely gorgeous and
she never said a word
and I can remember her face,
I can remember her clothing,
every thing, how she was sitting
with her knees together off
to the side and looking at
me with this lovely smile.
This look of pure love.
>> LG: Was she younger?
Was she older?
>> EA: She looked to
be kind of, I mean,
it's so hard to put in age.
>> LG: In age, yes.
>> EA: But I would say
kind of a perfect age.
You know, she was in
her early or mid 20s.
Beautiful girl with sparkling
blue eyes, high forehead,
you know, high cheek
bones, and this lovely smile
and the message coming
in from her.
And again this is pure concept,
not words, but the words
that I wrote down later
and she never said a word.
This was just her thoughts
and the word coming
straight into my awareness.
You are loved and cherished
dearly forever, you have nothing
to fear, there's nothing you
can do wrong in this realm,
in that spiritual realm.
You will be taken care off.
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: And it was such a
beautiful unconditionally loving
and comforting beyond words.
I mean, just to even recall
it now just gives me shivers
because it was so perfect
and wonderful and welcoming.
Nothing to fear, there's such
a deep lesson in that for all
of us because in fact that old
saying there's nothing to fear
but fear itself is far truer
than I ever, ever knew before.
>> LG: Right.
>> EA: And that fears the
source of any of the darkness
and the badness and the material
realm as well as in some
of the lower aspects
of the spiritual realm.
>> LG: As you know
about the brain,
when you recall this experience,
it lights up certain centers
of your brain that enables you
to re-live the experience
in certain ways.
Is that what you're feeling?
>> EA: Well, it's-- that's
very much the case, I would--
it's important to
understand that a big part
of the lesson I learned from
this journey as a neuroscientist
as one whose interested
in brain, in mind
and consciousness is it
showed me very clearly
that there is a tremendous
aspect
of our conscious awareness
moment to moment that even
if we had perfect infinite
knowledge of the state
of the physical brain, moment
to moment we would be
missing a tremendous amount
of how to explain it all.
And that is the crucial
element that it showed me
and no uncertain terms,
a consciousness is
the thing that exist.
That consciousness is
actually enriched tremendously
when it's freed up from the
shackles of the physical brain
and the human mind dumb down
on this side of the veil
and that's a very
important thing.
>> LG: Yeah, where
does conscious--
where does consciousness exist
in the brain that hasn't been--
>> EA: It-- consciousness
it not created by the brain.
>> LG: Oh--
>> EA: That is the
important thing.
This is an old idea--
>> LG: None of the lobes, none
of the cortexes, its not--
>> EA: No, I mean
in neuroscience we know a
tiny bit about consciousness.
We know that there seems
to be an ignition system
in what's called a
reticular activating formation
down the lower brain stem
that that seems to be firing
in about a 40 hertz signal rate
up into what we call
thalamocortical loops did going
up in the thalamus which is part
of the deep gray
structure of the brain.
And there are hundreds
of millions
of self referential
loops between neocortex
and the thalamus deep
down in the brain.
And these loops are what we
think in neuroscience have to do
with this phenomenon
of consciousness.
But I can tell you it's
a very primitive kind
of theory that's not very
well worked out and certainly
when it comes to
explaining the true mechanism
of consciousness what
is it they gives us this
conscious awareness.
I can tell you that modern
neuroscience is absolutely moved
on that.
>> LG: No clue.
>> EA: They have
no clue whatsoever.
I mean its kindergarten level.
You know that's the
best they can offer.
>> LG: So, in your
words, Dr. Alexander,
what is consciousness?
What is awareness?
>> EA: I think it's
important to--
for the viewing audience
to realize
that consciousness
is really this--
this very simple thing that each
and everyone of us knows more
than we know anything else.
In fact, it's the only thing
that you can really kind of come
out and say you know exists.
>> LG: Wow.
[laughs].
>> EA: Is your own
consciousness.
>> LG: This is true from an
experiential perspective, yes.
>> EA: Well, I mean
as a neuroscientist,
I'd known for a long time
that what we see is reality,
physical reality around us.
For our entire life before we
were born, every single bit,
every bit of that reality is
patterns of neuronal firing
of nerves cells, brain,
cells firing patterns
in time and space.
And they're firing in this
complex three pound gelatinous
mass that's floating
in a warm dark bath.
It could easily be
a computer program.
We're running in
some advance computer
and you wouldn't
know the difference.
There's no way you know
the difference because all
of it has been coding, it's
been coding from the get-go
from before your birth
that's kind of saying
that this correlates to that,
this correlates to that--
>> LG: Neuro connections
are made.
>> EA: This create pattern
recognition machine.
But that doesn't mean that any
of that external reality
is what it appears to be.
So, it's important to
remember that are view
of reality is simply a model of
something we think is out there.
But consciousness is the
thing that truly does exist.
>> LG: Interesting.
It'd be interesting to find
out how you live your
life differently know--
knowing all of that.
I mean do you-- can you change
your reality in a moment?
Do you-- are you letting go
of bad old habits and patterns
because you know how
consciousness this works now?
>> EA: Well, I can say
that it changed everything
about my life.
The most important lesson
really and this came again
from the gift of severe
bacterium meningitis.
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: That should've disabled
all with the most rudimentary
of conscious experience
at all and yet did not.
It was my previous self would
have said well the next step
beyond that earthworm eye view
was a state of nothingness.
And that's why it
was so shocking
because of the next state was
actually the blinders coming off
emerging into this
amazingly ultra real realm.
You know, the gateway
and the core
and that was the
incredible gift of it all.
And that is what showed me
that consciousness is freed
up to much higher level when
it leaves the physical brain
and body.
When our body dies,
our consciousness is much
more aware going up into
that all knowing level.
>> LG: That's someone--
>> EA: And that part is what is
so mind bending about
the journey.
That's what the book
is proof of,
it's proof of consciousness--
>> LG: Consciousness.
>> EA: -- being independent
of the physical
and actually much grander and
actually setting the stage
on which all of the physical,
material universe unfolds.
>> LG: So, does that
lead you into realizing
that there's alternate
realities, parallel universes,
other dimensions, have you
thought about that or--
>> EA: Well, I've thought about
that a lot and it actually--
I think to me it's--
it's amazing spiritually
and science actually strengthen
each other tremendously.
But the-- the issue with that
is science is the thing that's
at the kindergarten
level, our current science
and that science needs to
greatly expand it's boundaries
to fully embrace the
mystery of consciousness
which is eternal soul and
spirit connected as one
at deeper levels and it's core
is driven completely by oneness
with the divine and creator
of the entire multivers.
And that is what we're
all connected down to
through our consciousness.
>> LG: Multivers, I love that.
Now, the face that
you saw of this girl,
you later recognized as--
explain this of the
face of your--
>> EA: Well, I-- I
have to put out there.
This is a spoiler alert to
those who haven't read the book
because that is kind of
a big part of the book.
>> LG: Nice.
Yes, yes.
>> EA: And it's-- I actually
love telling that story
to people in person even more
than I have enjoy having
them read it in the book
because telling it, sharing
stories is far more powerful.
But if we give out a
spoiler alert here to those
who are wanting to read the book
and get the full impact of it.
>> LG: Yeah, it's still
really a good journey.
Yes.
>> EA: It is absolutely stunning
the revelation that came to me
because I've been
wrestling for months,
we're trying to understand this.
My older son having the fourth
who has majoring in neuroscience
in college when I-- when I came
out of the hospital, he saw me
and he could tell there
was an incredible change.
I mean he was sure I was dead
from the first moment he
saw me in the hospital.
So, then he is very,
very shocked two
and a half weeks later when
he comes home, you know,
he's heard of course
that I survived at all
that I was getting home
and he drove home overnight
two days before thanks giving
to surprise me.
He saw me standing there at
the door 16 pounds lighter
with an IV in my arm
still getting antibiotics
but he looked at me and said,
"It's like there was a
light shining in me."
Like I was so much more aware
than I'd ever been before.
And there had been a
profound transformation
and everybody could see that.
And he told me if you want
this to be of any value
to people you must write it all
down before you read anything
about near death experiences,
physics or cosmology
and before you talk
with anyone who is there
when you're waking up.
It was invested by is anybody
has ever given me although I
wanted to read everything I
could but I had to put that off.
And over the six weeks I wrote
about 20,000 words towards
the end of that six weeks is
when I was going back
talking to my neurologist
and there are surgeons who saw
me when I was ill, other doctors
who saw me when I was ill and
trying to understand I was going
through my scans, going
through my neurologic exams,
going to the lab values and all
these information is the same.
But wait a minute,
this patient-- my--
you know, Eben Alexander in coma
with bacteria meningitis
should have died.
Know that was, that
brain was not capable
of coming up with any of this.
And so, then I had
to explain, "Well,
how did it happened then?"
And I was trying to explain it
as a brain based phenomenon.
And I have the nine
hypotheses in the book
and there are more ideas in that
that I talked over
with colleagues.
But the thing that is so
powerful and the reason
that this story is taken
to medical profession
and the scientific
world by storm is
because this severe bacterial
meningitis induced coma should
have allowed for no
such experience at all.
And yet the experience
was clear as a ballot.
It was all there from when
I first was waking up.
>> LG: You should have
had no recollection
of anything whatsoever.
>> EA: Right.
>> LG: No experience, nothing.
>> EA: Zero, at all.
>> LG: No consciousness.
>> EA: And that is the only
thing I knew when I came back.
>> LG: Feel if you had.
>> EA: And then over six weeks,
the rest of my knowing
came back.
Some of my critics say, "Well,
he's only a neurosurgeon.
He's not a neuroscientist.
And in fact, I have to
confess, that somewhat true,
neurosurgeons think they know
a lot about consciousness.
I thought I know a lot but we--
we know a few things about
how consciousness is shut
down in our patients.
We think we know ways
of bringing it back.
We've been using general
anesthesia from more
than 150 years nobody on earth
can tell you the first thing
about how that truly works
at a beating consciousness.
They don't know.
That shows you how little we
truly know about consciousness
and that is a huge part
of the awakening here.
And that's why the
scientific world gets it.
This was an extraordinary
journey
because of that meningitis.
And because I should
not have recovered,
my doctors to this day have
no idea how I recovered.
>> LG: Now, I mean coming
from the consciousness world
from that, that realm, I am
curious about as we were talking
about the alternate realities
you mentioned the souls
between lives.
>> EA: Right.
>> LG: That was so clear to you.
>> LG: How have you known that?
And I still-- are you able
to tell us about the face?
Without being a spoiler.
>> EA: Yes I can, I mean I have
to warn that it's a spoiler
but to get to that whole issue
about how I finally
came to realization.
I spent those six weeks writing
down everything I can remember.
Then I started reading
about near death
experiences and I read a lot.
I ended up reading more
than a hundred books
to try and understand.
>> LG: My goodness.
>> EA: All of my journey.
>> LG: And you research
of course Raymond Moody.
>> EA: A lot, well-- and many,
many others and also I had
to get deeply into the
physics of consciousness.
I read a lot of Roger
Penrose, trying to get way
down Irreducible Mind towards a
psychology for the 21st century,
incredibly powerful book about
none local consciousness.
Also Pim van Lommel's wonderful
book, consciousness beyond life.
I had to learn a
tremendous amount trying
to get through this.
Now, as we moved out
there four months
out I was deeply mystified
because I came to realize
that my journey should very
clearly the consciousness is
actually enriched
when it's freed
up from the human
brain and body.
That there is a very rich light
between lies and as everything
to do with the real
reason we're here.
I came to see that reincarnation
is the only possible explanation
and that's a very
long involved story.
>> LG: From a neuroscientist
that's amazing.
>> EA: But there's
no way to get right--
well, the scientific data
supporting reincarnation,
past life memories,
transpersonal psychology
is very, very strong.
There really is no denying.
People can deny like
I did before my comma
because they refuse to
believe that's possible.
But when you actually start
looking into it you realize
that of course there's way
too much to it to just ignore.
So, it's very real.
>> LG: You have to go
into that a little bit.
What do you mean by that?
What do you mean
it's undeniably--
>> EA: Well, for example--
>> LG: -- true, scientifically
true?
>> EA: Well for example, well,
that source in general that I--
I like for scientist is the
book Irreducible Mind toward a
psychology for the 21st century.
It's by Ed Kelly, Emily
Kelly, Bruce Grayson,
the whole division of perceptual
studies group at University
of Virginia to 800
pages of dents data
and analysis scientific
that shows
that none local consciousness
is absolutely real.
Near death experiences
after death communication
deathbed visions,
past life memories,
reincarnation,
out of body experiences, remote
viewing of psychokinesis--
>> LG: Just because
of the sheer numbers
of people that have done it?
>> EA: Well, because of
cases that are well document
that have been well
studied that are--
that are absolutely undeniable.
>> LG: Great
>> EA: So, there's a lot of it.
>> LG: Yeah.
>> EA: It's undeniable and of
course the skeptics out there
who say can not exist have
refused to look into it.
>> LG: Well, it makes people--
>> EA: When you look
into it, it--
you start to realize
and of course I talk
with a lot of this people.
I've experienced
so much on my own.
>> LG: And makes people
like us that have experience
that realized we're not alone.
>> EA: Right.
>> LG: That's great.
>> EA: And this is all
about science growing.
Science needs to mature.
The science that I
worshiped before my comma
and believe me materialist
science is a faith
based religion.
As much as materialist
science wants to tell you
that it has a method that
studies a nature of reality.
I will tell you that
same materialist science,
conventional science that says
the physical brain creates
consciousness is
absolutely false.
It's smoke and mirrors
that's why for them
to be talking about, you know,
a theory of everything I would
say it's quite a bit premature
when it best they might
understand a little bit
about 4 percent of what
they know exist based
on gravitational text.
The other 96 percent is dark
matter and dark energy and
yet that very same science
like I said is totally clueless
on any kind of hypothesis
about how the physical
brain might give rise
to consciousness.
>> LG: And how--
>> EA: And certainly there at
a complete loss when it comes
to none local consciousness.
>> LG: Yes, yes I mean I notice
that you did your training
at Duke University where many
of these studies were
conducted decades ago.
So, that was a good
place to start.
But in terms of your
colleagues now, they--
how did they take
what you're saying?
You're basically discrediting
the entire scientific community.
>> EA: Well I-- I would like to
say Duke medical school is one
of the most forward thingking
scientific institutions I
know of.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: As his Harvard
medical school,
they're both very
forward thinking.
A lot of people at
those institutions
and at other medical
schools have invited me to--
>> LG: Talk, great.
>> EA: Give presentations, you
know, I'm getting invitations,
American college's surgeons
other groups this is
about an awakening in science.
I don't-- I don't think I have
to stress that a lot of nurses,
ICU nurses, hospice nurses
have know this forever.
It's not news to them,
they simply have seen
so much evidence
with their own eyes.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: When patients make that
transition and leave their body
when the physical body dies.
They know that soul is eternal.
They see evidence just like a
lot of family members do to.
And the doctors,
you know, would--
in recent decades doctors
have not been quite as likely
as the nurses to be
there right to the end--
>> LG: Right.
>> EA: -- of physical life.
>> LG: Nurses stand
a lot more times.
>> EA: And so the doctors
have not seen as much.
But a lot of doctors
get this too.
So, it's very much
about sciences
and the medical community
knowing this is real.
Realizing that-- that
smoke and mirrors trick
of materialist science that
pretends to be on the verge
of a theory of everything when
in fact it can not even begin
to explain the one thing
we all truly know exist
which is our own consciousness.
>> LG: And do you say
this in your lectures?
>> EA: Yes, absolutely.
And that's why a lot of the
scientific world is coming
out embracing us because
they know this is closer
to the truth.
The hard problem consciousness,
the enigma of quantum mechanics.
They start to become much
more tractable when you start
to open the field of science
to fully embrace the eternal--
>> LG: That is why you're--
>> EA: -- existence
of soul and spirit.
>> LG: -- your story is very,
very important and powerful
because it is bridging the gap
where there're many have
put the legs on the bridge
but you're a very big
peace of bridging that gap
between science and
consciousness.
And it's-- it's very
exciting to see.
So, I'm going to take
you one more time back
to the phase that was there--
>> EA: OK
>> LG: -- because I
know it has something--
it has a very important part to
do with the end of your story
which is why you
included in the book?
>> EA: Right.
>> LG: Is that phase-- now, you
had learned through your life,
your course of your life that
you were put up for adoption
at a certain point of your life.
At what age were you--
>> EA: Right, my mother was
a sophomore in high school.
>> LG: OK.
>> EA: And my father was
a senior in high school.
And they really couldn't
see anyway to get together.
And they'll also could
not see anyway to keep me.
>> LG: To raise a child?
>> EA: Right.
My mother wanted to very much
her father could not keep a job.
There was really no way as a
10th grade unmarried mother to--
to bring a new baby
into the home.
And so, finally, after
four months she had
to sign the papers to
give me up for adoption.
I was very fortunate I was
adopted into a loving family
that supported every
one of my dreams.
I couldn't have asked
for better.
And like many adoptees
I would write letters
to the children's home, North
Carolina had very strict law.
Sometimes birthdates were
changed to make more difficult
for babies to reunite
with birth families.
And I got use to the answer
to my letters to my inquiries
that said, "No, no
contact from your mother."
And I let it go.
So, if it hadn't
been for the fact
that in the year 2000 my older
son Eben the fourth who at
that time was in sixth grade
in school in Massachusetts.
He was doing school
projects in family genealogy.
And Eben is always been
one of the students
who wouldn't leave a stone
unturned if he wanted
to understand something.
It was torture for his teachers.
And so, when he had this
family project on, you know,
school project family
genealogy, he wouldn't let it go
when I just told
him that, you know,
adopted family stories at that.
This is family genealogy,
I want to know
about our birth heritage,
our biological roots.
And so, I decided out
humor and write a letter
to children's home which I did.
And I fully expect to get
the same answer I'd always
gotten before.
And that's not what happened.
And so, was in-- in February
of 2000 then I was driving
down the road with Eben the
fourth, we're going skiing
in Maine, we're driving
to a blizzard.
So, Friday afternoon
and I remembered, "Oh,
Betty said to call her"
she was a social worker
of the children's home.
She said to call her that day.
Maybe she'd have news.
I called her up and
she said, "Well yes,
I did find something out,
are you sitting down?
I thought I was driving through
a blizzard so that qualified.
>> LG: Sitting down, yes.
>> EA: And she said, "Well,
your birth parents got married."
And I can not tell you
what a shock that was.
Never in my life had I expected
that they ended up
getting married.
>> LG: So, your mind
started racing I'm sure.
>> EA: My mind was racing
in fact I decided
I'd better pull over.
And she said, "They
had three children."
>> LG: Oh my goodness.
>> EA: But your youngest
sister died two years ago.
That would have been in 1998.
And they're still grieving over
that so it's not a good time
to come back in their lives.
And that phone call that--
then I hang up and that was it.
That's what I was left with.
>> LG: Turns you
entirely on upside down.
>> EA: It turned
everything upside down
and I really didn't realize.
You know, at that time I
just kind of stuffed it.
But I came to realize
over months and years then
in fact it started my
whole life unraveling.
>> LG: How--
>> EA: It started
everything to turn around
and it was seven years later
that finally my sisters walking
on the beach one day on a
family vacations said, "Well,
don't you think it's
about time you reached
out to your birth family again."
And I thought, oh gosh.
I remembered how
that it took me over.
But I thought I guess
they're right.
So, I wrote another letter that
was in a year before my coma.
That was in August of 2007.
Wrote a letter to them and ended
up getting a positive response
and October 5th, 2007,
I met my birth parents.
I had not seen them in 54 years.
And that is a beautiful
story in its own right.
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: An amazing adventure.
Meeting them, the next
day meeting my brother
and sister and of course--
>> LG: Oh my goodness.
>> EA: -- introducing adoptive
and birth families and a lot
of back and forth,
tremendous beautiful experience
that has been, always
a little bitter sweet.
Because at the back of it all,
deep at the core was Betsy
[assumed spelling] was gone long
before I even knew she existed.
And that part always
brought some sadness.
There wasn't a lot
that I knew about her,
wasn't like they really like
dwelling on that topic and--
>> LG: How old was
she when she passed?
>> EA: She was 36
when she passed.
And in fact, that's where
everything comes together
to answer your question.
Because my other sister
Cathy [assumed spelling],
by birth sister, had told me
that someday she would
send me a picture of Betsy.
And that picture arrived about
four months after my coma
when I was deeply
into wrestling,
we're trying to understand it.
I'd come to realize that it
was a very authentic journey
that absolutely validated so
many other experiences reported
over 3,000 years, not just
near death experiences
but afterlife literature
back to the ancient Greeks--
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: -- and Egyptians.
And the stories of
mystics and prophets
over thousands of years.
All validated very
real and understanding
about consciousness and yet
to me as I read more and more
of these near-death
experiences coming
to realize where was my father.
If I had scripted this
my father who had passed
over four years before my coma
would have been there front
and center.
He was no where to be found.
And who in the world
was that beautiful girl
in the butterfly wings?
>> LG: Right, right.
>> EA: I saw her many times,
every time I pass through there
and I remember her
face so perfectly.
I will never forget
everything about her.
I remember her so clearly.
I knew I'd never
met her in my life.
And that part was
a huge mystery.
And it all came together four
months after my coma and I got
that picture from Cathy
with this poem emblazed
into [inaudible] that's in the
book When I'm not here Tomorrow,
a beautiful poem that was
written by David Romano.
And that, I remember tears just
filling my eyes as I was looking
at this picture,
reading this poem,
it was just such an
emotional moment.
I put that up on my dresser
and it was the next morning
when I was reading an Elizabeth
Kubler Ross' book on Death
and Dying, a story
about a 13-year-old girl
who had a powerful
near death experience.
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: Deep coma was welcome to
heaven by her brother was shown
that incredible unconditional
love and its infinite power.
He helped her to make a
decision about coming back
to this world which he did.
And when she did, she was
mystified over the experience.
She would talk with her
father, I don't understand,
I don't have a brother.
And he said, "Well, you did
but he died four months,
three months before
you were born
so we never told you about it."
And I looked up at the
picture on by dresser.
And immediately saw that
girl on the butterfly wing.
And in the picture,
she's looking at me like,
do you finally get it?
And it was the most shocking--
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: -- revelation of my
entire existence reaching
across all those
dimensions proving--
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: -- with great power to
me the reality of that journey
in a way that I would
never ever doubt it again.
>> LG: So, you had never
seen her picture before
and this beautiful picture
of a face that came to you
in that experience-- in the
near-death experience showed
up in a photo of your sister
who passed three years of prior.
>> EA: Yes.
And it was-- I think a big
catalyst and it was reading
that Elizabeth Kubler
Ross story because--
>> LG: Which part of it?
The acceptance?
>> EA: Well, the fact that this
girl I had always, you know,
to that point I'd come
to think that, you know,
such a guardian angel as I'd
come to call her in my writings
with somebody of great
importance to you in this life.
And so, I kept looking
for people, you know,
in my life who I'd met
in this physical life.
And it never entered my mind
that it could be a soul,
a very dear close
importance to me
that I'd never known
in this life.
And that was the
revelation that I really got
from that Elizabeth
Kubler Ross story.
>> LG: Did you ever think
about the words that--
the message, I should say, that
she gave you that you are loved,
that you are-- that you are OK.
Has that changed the way
that you live your life now?
>> EA: It's totally
changed everything.
Part of it is realizing, as
I pointed out in the book.
I kind of used the metaphor,
the whole story of my adoption
and the fact that I was kind of
separated from my roots and in
that sense was kind of
unloving, unlovable detached
from my true identity.
And--
>> LG: So, on a soul level,
that's what you were
really, really looking for.
>> EA: That's-- well, that's
kind of what I was seeing
in my life because of that
adoption story in my life.
And yet what I came to see in
my coma journey very clearly.
And this is the truth that
applies to all of us is
that when we buy into this
kind of scientific materialism
in this secular thinking,
the material world
is all that there is.
That's false and its terrible
misleading because it allows us
to forget that we are divine,
that we are infinitely loved--
>> LG: Right, right.
>> EA: -- by the creative
power of this entire universe.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: And are forever loved
and it's an unconditional love
that demands nothing from us.
Now of course, I know also the
richer aspects of our journey,
of our many lives, incarnation
that it's all about love,
compassion, forgiveness
in the ascendance
of our souls in that
higher realm.
So, it's not as if we come in
and can just do anything
we want and be mean and--
>> LG: Right.
>> EA: -- you'll pass out
pain and suffering to others
because we are here to learn the
lessons that that is not the way
to live and we will reap.
You know, what we saw when
it comes to that kind of--
>> LG: So, you know
this for sure now?
>> EA: Yes.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: I mean that is
part of the deepest lesson
that was there in that
core realm is that love,
that unconditional love,
compassion, forgiveness,
coming to see soul mates in the
very richest that soul mate--
a soul mate might
be someone who,
before my coma, I
saw as my enemy.
Soul mates come in many
forms, we're here to learn
from our soul mates and
to teach our soul mates.
And after my coma--
>> LG: Interesting.
>> EA: I came to see that often,
a soul mate might be someone
who before I'd seen as
an enemy or my nemesis
who in fact was there to
help me learn a very deep
though lessons.
>> LG: Wow.
>> EA: And the other way around.
Often I'm helping them learn
a very deep and tough lesson
and that is what
we are here to do.
This is soul school, this is
where we learn these lessons
but to begin to comprehend them,
you must have an open concept
about reincarnation and about
how it's not just birth to death
because if you just think it's
birth to death nothing more,
there's no way you can possibly
see the much grander scheme
of it all.
>> LG: Well, speaking of grand
schemes, you ever thought
about why you came back.
>> EA: Well, for the longest
time I was trying to explain it,
you know, as a brain
based phenomenon,
as a neuroscientist
trying to learn something
about consciousness then I have
the revelation that showed me
that it actually was
so much that validation
of spiritual journeys of sharing
similarities with thousands
of other journeys reported
over thousands of years.
>> LG: Yeah.
>> EA: And as I would talk more
and more with other experiences
and with other people
about all this.
People would keep telling me,
you know this happened
for a reason.
>> LG: Yes, yes.
>> EA: And of course I
was trying to approach it
as the objective
doctor, you know,
as much as I could realizing
that they're deep lessons there
for all of us but denying
that there could be
anything special about me.
And in fact I still think that
the special thing about me is
that I'm just like
everybody else.
I have the same, you know,
problems and foibles in life.
I'm absolutely no saint
at all and, you know,
I'm just like all
the rest of us.
I'm just, you know, a normal
person and so many times
when people would say that
to me about this happened
to you for a special reason.
I would think back to the fact
I was given away as a baby,
and that gives me
a real commonality
with each and every one of us.
Because we all have that kind
of sense of being detached.
>> LG: Have you even tapped
into that message though
to tell people who have been
adopted that they are loved?
>> EA: Oh, I tap into
that message a lot.
And this--
>> LG: Good.
>> EA: -- and the thing is of
course this message is not just
for adpotees to realize
that they are deeply loved
and cherished and have
been in this earthly realm
by that family that had to
let them go out of the love.
But it's also that
much grander message,
the same message
though, to all the rest
of us, to every one of us.
>> LG: That we are loved.
>> EA: That each and every one
of us is an infinitely
powerful light being,
a spiritual being eternal loved
beyond our wildest imagination
by the creator of this universe.
And that we are all one.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: And it's a
beautiful gift to share.
>> LG: That was the
biggest message I got
when I had my experience
was that of oneness.
Now, you spend a lot of time in
meditation now still don't you?
>> EA: Well, I came
to realize of course
that consciousness
was right at the core
of everything I was
trying to understand.
And also to realize that
the linguistic brain,
that little voice in our head
actually gets in the way.
You know, before my coma, I
felt the voice in our head is,
you know, that's the pinnacle
of intellectual achievement
in the known universe.
Is that little rational
logical kind of scientific voice
of our thinking mind
of the intellect
of the well read inteligencia.
Well, fact of the matter is
there's far deeper knowing
that's far richer than anything
that voice can ever
put into words.
I knew as a neurosurgeon
that that little voice is
just the tiniest fraction
of your brain is involved
in that little voice.
And there're are two regions
that have to do with production
of speech and reception
and understanding
of speech connected.
But they're very small
part of the brain.
That's one of those
things that kind of leads
to a misunderstanding about
what is consciousness.
>> LG: What is chatter
for that reason?
>> EA: Yeah, what
is mind chatter?
We know what is a
mind chatter is.
And of course I also knew of the
experiments from Benjamin Libet
and others beginning
in early 1980s
that that little voice is
not even the decision maker.
That little voice is actually
informed of the decision of 100
to 150 milliseconds after
the decision is made.
Yeah.
>> LG: So, your mind chatter
is not the decision maker?
>> EA: No, not at all.
And you-- that's
something that--
>> LG: How do you know that?
>> EA: Neuroscientist have
known that for 30 or 40 years.
That the little voice
is-- and it--
I reference this in my book, the
experiments of Benjamin Libet
and then others who
followed suit.
And I described the
experiment on my book.
But basically that little voice,
you can show an electrical
recording of cortical activity
of the brain that when we make a
spontaneous freewill decisions,
the decision is actually
made before
that voice says it's
made the decision.
And that was well documented
and has been well shown.
Of course then, in the
traditional psychology world,
that starts bringing up issues
of consciousness, subconscious,
unconscious, superconscious,
you know,
universal consciousness
et cetera.
And again, those were all
linguistic definitions
and they're kind of
misleading like so many aspects
of the linguistic brain are.
The linguistic brain is
heavily tied to self and ego.
Self and ego are important
ideas in kind of survival
and materialist Darwinian
world but they get in the way
of a deeper knowing that
is our true consciousness.
I came to realize meditation
is the key to getting there.
Getting deep--
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: -- exploring
into consciousness--
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: -- is absolutely the key.
>> LG: Did you meditate
before your experience as--
>> EA: I had done something
called silver mind control back
when I was in college.
>> LG: Right.
>> EA: The parachute team,
we did silver mind control
to practice free fall formations
and meditation before
we went and did the job.
So, it helped us to
do a better job--
>> LG: Great.
>> EA: -- in freefall.
But then I let the meditation
go and it was only after my coma
that I got back into it.
And currently I'm
very interested
in using sound techniques.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: I mentioned in my
book Robert Monroe's work
Out of Body Experiences that
he had using what he call the
hemispheric synchronization
or Hemi-sync.
And I now work with a group
called Sacred Acoustics,
at sacredacustics.com.
>> LG: Oh, and it uses
those binaural beats
and that Hemi-sync technology?
>> EA: Luckily with
Karen [assumed spelling]
and Kevin [assumed
spelling] of Sacred Acoustics,
we are making new
exercises everyday or two.
So, we're actively evolving
how these exercises can go
and how powerful they are.
>> LG: And they get you into an
altered state of consciousness.
>> EA: Right.
And I'm convinced, based on
the fact that my meningitis,
which as I said, by inactivating
my neocortex taking it all
flying, it actually took
the blinders of which opened
up into this much
richer ultra reality.
Not stuck in time and
space and here and now.
I though, well, maybe
hemispheric synchronization
that is some kind of
auditory signaling
that would ring my signals of my
brain, the electrical activity
into more of a homogeneous
state just as my meningitis did.
That might enable
my awareness to get
into non local consciousness,
that much grander consciousness
that exists independently of us.
That is what near death
experiences bring back
with them, glimpses of that.
>> LG: To try to explain.
Well--
>> EA: Right.
>> LG: We have a picture of
your beautiful family here
and what do they think
about their neuroscientist
dad turned meditator
and acoustic sound producer.
>> EA: They're very
much into this.
They certainly realized
they were transformed
by this experience
in a tremendous way
>> LG: And your relationship
with them as well.
>> EA: Well, I can tell
you that when you go
through this powerful,
absolutely shocking,
life-changing experience of this
degree, everybody gets changed.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: Not just in
the immediate family
but the ripples go far and wide.
>> LG: Absolutely.
>> EA: And many, many family,
extended family, friends,
far beyond that range
are affected
by exactly what happened to me.
And you can bet it
caused tremendous growth
in my immediate family.
>> LG: Yes.
>> EA: And it's often
in directions
that are not necessarily
what you predict
but it has opened all of
us to a much richer knowing
of our soul's true
calling realizing
that our souls are
eternal, that we're here
to learn lessons
and teach lessons.
>> LG: I am so glad
personally that you came back
to tell this whole story
and to bridge this gap
for so many people.
And the book is a very, very
wonderful, very quick read,
gripping stories in the
beginning and I wish you
to come back and tell
us what's next for you
because I'm pretty sure
you're up to big things.
>> EA: Well, thank
you very much.
It's just a real joy to be
here and I love that there's
such an active community our
there, people who are wanting
to know more about the truth
not buying into, you know,
the standard stale dogma
from the scientific world,
from the religious world, there
is a much richer understanding
of all of this it
brings it all together.
>> LG: Absolutely.
It's a huge community
growing every single minute
and these types of opportunities
just give that community a space
to say, "Hey, we're not alone."
>> EA: Right.
Exactly.
>> LG: So, thank you
so much Dr. Alexander.
Thank you so much for
sharing your story,
I appreciate everything
you've said.
>> EA: Well, thank you for
having me, I appreciate it.
>> LG: Absolutely, absolutely.
And if you would like to
watch a reply of my interview
with Dr. Eben Alexander or share
with your friends,
go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time I
invite you to stay inspired.
[ Music ]